
# **ANALYSIS METHODS**

## Priori Analysis
It is impossible to know the exact amount of time to execute any command unless the following are known:
- Machine for execution
- Machine instruction set
- Time required by each machine instruction
- Translation of the compiler from source to machine language

## Posteriori Analysis
- We know the set of instructions and compiler from source to one language.
## Common Algorithms
1. **Search Algorithms**
	Find specific data in a structure
2. **Sorting algorithms**
	Take a dataset and apply a sort order into it
3. **Computational Algorithms**
	Given one set of data, calculate another
4. **Collection algorithms**
	Work with collections of data (count, navigate, filter)  

## Posteriori Analysis Example

**Test #1**
Name - Input Size
Algorithm #1 - 1 sec - 10 secs
Algorithm #2 - 3 secs - 15 secs

**Test #2** - 1000 inputs for last
Name - Input Size
Algorithm #1 - 1 sec - 10 secs - 100 secs
Algorithm #2 - 3 secs - 15 secs - 30 secs

## Priori Analysis Example
Let `A[i]` be the `i`th number on the list `(a1, a2, a3)` 

- Time taken by an algorithm grows with the input size
	- Input size - Number of items in the input
	- Running time - Number of steps executed
- Concern: Rate of growth or order of growth
- Refers to how quickly the resources required by algorithm (typically time or space) increase as the size of the input data (`n`) grows. It provides way to describe and compare efficiency of algorithms in terms of their scalability.

## Rate of Growth
**Understanding Algorithm Performance**
- Measure how algorithm responds to dataset size
- Big-O notation
	- Classifies performance as the input size grows
	- 'O' indicates the order of operation - time scale to perform an operation
- Many algorithms and data structures have more than one O
	- Inserting data, searching and deleting data.

**Common Big-O Classifications**
Notation, Description, Example
O(1) - Constant time - Looking up a single element in an array
O(log n) - Logarithmic - Finding an item in a sorted array with binary search
O(n) - Linear time - Searching an unsorted array for specific value
O(n log n) - Log-linear - Complex sorting algorithms like heap sort and merge sort.
O(n^2) - Quadratic - Simple sorting algorithms, such as bubble sort, selection sort, and insertion sort.

**Understanding Algorithm Efficiency: Input Size, Time & Space Complexity**
**Input Size (nnn)**
- The size or amount of data that the algorithm processes

**Resource Usage**
- Time Complexity: How execution time increases with nnn.
- Space Complexity: How the memory usage increases with nnn.

**Mathematical Representation**
- Rate of growth is often expressed using asymptotic notation which provides an abstract way to describe the relationship between input size and resource usage.

**Frequency Counting**
If an algorithm takes 1 second to run with the problem size 8, what is the time requirement (approximately) for that algorithm with the problem size 16?

| $O(1)$          | $T(n)$ = 1 second                                                                         |
| :-------------- | :---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| $O(log_2 n)$    | $T(n) = \frac{1 \times \log_2{16}}{\log_2{8}} = \frac{4}{3}$ seconds                      |
| $O(n)$          | $T(n) = \frac{1\times 16}{8} = 2$ seconds                                                 |
| $O(n \log_2 n)$ | $T(n) = \frac{(1\times 16 \times \log_2 {16})}{8 \times \log_2{8}} = \frac{8}{3}$ seconds |
| $O(n^2)$        | $T(n) = \frac{\left(1 \times 16^2\right)}{8^2} = 4$ seconds                               |
| $O(n^3)$        | $T(n) = \frac{1 \times 16^3}{8^3} = 8$ seconds                                            |
| $O(2^n)$        | $T(n) = \frac{1\times 2^{16}}{2^8} = 2^8 = 256$ seconds                                   |
